# Pneumonia-Detection-using-Deep-Learning
Pneumonia is an extremely prevalent infectious disease. Manual diagnosis by professional doctors is currently the most prevalent form of pneumonia identification. This helps to find the lung capacity but there is a disadvantage. The accuracy and efficiency of this method are not sufficient. We have used deep learning to detect pneumonia as an attempt to quantify the severity of the situation. The technology in the current times has improved to an extent that computer-aided diagnostics is being used. With development of artificial intelligence, deep learning is being used to detect pneumonia and this can be used to achieve better and higher accuracies. In the paper, we will be using the methods of deep learning and machine learning to analyse chest X-ray images which will help to detect pneumonia. We will also be using the method of transfer learning using the VGG16 model and Convolutional Neural Networks for image processing and identification of the pneumonia patients via their chest X-rays. </br>
## Introduction: 
Pneumonia is an infection that inflames the air sacs in one or both lungs. The air sacs may fill with blood or pus, causing cough with pus in it, fever, chills and difficulty breathing. A variety of organisms, including bacteria, viruses and fungi, can cause pneumonia. This disease can range in seriousness from mild to life-threatening. It is most serious for infants and young children, people older than age 65, and people with health problems or weakened immune systems. It is categorized mainly into two types, lobar pneumonia and broncho pneumonia. In lobar pneumonia, there is a acute bacterial infection of a part of lobe or the entire lobe, or even two lobes of one or both lungs. In broncho pneumonia, there is an infection of the terminal bronchioles that extends into the surrounding alveoli resulting in patchy consolidation of the lung. Radiology is one of the many branches of medicine that basically focuses on making use of medical images for the detection, diagnosis and characterization of the disease. One of the main roles of a radiologist is to view a medical image and based on the image production, write a report of the observed findings. For pneumonia, chest X-rays are a common form of analysis and detection. This method is subjective because it depends on the experience of the doctor-in-charge and thus it makes the method less efficient and highly inaccurate. Also, in poorer sections of the society, there is lack of doctors and specialized equipments and therefore, timely diagnosis of pneumonia is not possible. Nowadays, technology has improved immensely and a technique called Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD) has come into picture. It involves the usage of various algorithms and models which help in increasing efficiency and accuracy of pneumonia recognition. Deep learning has been rapidly developing which helps healthcares detect and diagnose pneumonia worldwide. </br>
## Methodology: 
### Technologies Used: 
The following technologies are to be used for the project: </br>
 Numpy: Also known as Numerical Python. This library is useful for working with arrays. It also supports functions for working in domains of linear algebra, fourier transform, etc. </br>
 Pandas: This is an open source Python package which is mainly used for data manipulation and data analysis. </br>
 Matplotlib: It is a comprehensive library for creating static, animated and interactive visualizations in Python.</br>
 TensorFlow: It is a deep learning library that helps in data automation, model tracking, performance monitoring and model retraining.  Keras: It is a minimalistic deep learning library that runs on top of TensorFlow and it increases the speed and ease of development of deep learning models. </br>
 Scikit-learn: It is an open source data analysis library and it also features various machine learning models. </br>
### Primary steps to be followed: 
The steps followed in the project for the detection of pneumonia are: </br>
 Step 1: Data Collection and Cleaning: The image datasets are acquired from the Kaggle community’s RSNA Pneumonia Detection Challenge. It is originally from data mendeley website. The image dataset is cleaned(i.e. outliers are removed). </br>
 Step 2: Splitting the datasets: The image dataset is split into training data, testing data and validation data. There are two types of training, testing and validation datasets. One of them is chest X-rays of patients having pneumonia and other is chest X-rays of patients who are normal (i.e. they don’t have pneumonia). </br>
 Step 3: Data Augmentation: Since the amount of data in normal and pneumonia cases are not at the same or similar level, data augmentation is required to improve model accuracy. Some operations performed here are duplicating images and flipping them, rotating them or changing their hues. </br>
 Step 4: Insert data into the model:
Now the ready image data is fed into the VGG16 model for deep learning. The layers of the model are defined such as dense layer and average pooling layer. Then their activation function is chosen and the model is compiled and optimizer is used. </br>
 Step 5: Summary and training: The model summary is viewed which shows all the layers of the VGG16 model and then the model is trained with a certain number of epochs and steps per epoch. </br>
 Step 6: Accuracy and Finetuning: The model accuracy is found out and to minimise loss (error), the weights of the inputs are adjusted (finetuning of the model) and the model is compiled, trained on epochs and accuracy is found out to check the improvement. </br>
 Step 7: Final graphical representation: The final graph is made. There are two graphs. One graph shows the comparison between the training accuracy of the model and the validation accuracy of the model. Other graph shows the comparison between the training loss of the model and the validation loss of the model.</br>
